the smallest organisms on our planet are
also our oldest and most abundant type
of life-forms
these weird rocky blobs in the shallows
of Lake Clifton just south of Perth were
made by bacteria
these man's are called thrombo lights on
account of their clotted structure and
they built up over centuries by colonies
of microscopic bacterial cells now
although these colonies are rare by most
definitions bacteria are the dominant
form of life on our planet on every
surface across every landscape you find
bacteria - in fact numerically speaking
then there are more bacteria living on
and inside my body than there are human
cells
bacteria come in many shapes and forms
and are not actually animals or plants
instead sitting in their own unique
taxonomic Kingdom compared to the cells
we're made of bacteria are structurally
much simpler and far far smaller
bacteria typically around two microns in
size that's two millionths of a meter
which is very hard to picture but it
means that you could fit around half a
million of them on the head of a pin or
to look at it another way if I took a
single bacterium and scaled it up to the
size of this coin that I would be 25
kilometers high bacterial type organisms
were the first life on earth and they've
dominated our planets ever since
excluding viruses which by most
definitions are not alive bacteria are
the smallest free-living life forms we
know of but what ultimately puts the
limit on the smallest size of life
single-cell life needs to be big enough
to accommodate all the molecular
machinery of life and that size
ultimately depends on the basic laws of
physics it depends on the size of
molecules which depends on the size of
atoms which depends on fundamental
properties of the universe like the
strength of the force of
electromagnetism and the mass of an
electron and when you do those
calculations you find out that the
minimum size of a free-living organism
should be around 200 nanometers which is
about 200 billionths of a meter and that
should be universal it shouldn't only
apply to life on Earth but it should
apply to any carbon-based life anywhere
in the universe because it depends on
fundamental properties of the universe
you